Hello everybody.
And in this lecture we'll learn about pivot points which shall enable us to do things like this.
In this case we have manipulated our pivot points so that we can adjust this trapdoor and open it up
to various degrees.
And of course later on we'll learn how to animate that sort of thing as well which is incredibly useful
as hop into blender and find out more.
Okay.
So the first thing we need to deal with is where is the pivot point.
And what is it used for.
Well by default when you go ahead and you rotates an object it will rotate around its origin.
If you've only got one thing selected.
So in this case we have our cube selected and if we would go ahead and rotate it you'll notice it will
rotate around that center point the objects origin.
If I were to include the lamp and the camera as well.
When we go ahead and rotates it rotates around some arbitrary middle points.
By the looks of it.
Now that's not an arbitrary middle point that is in fact the median.
If we go up to the very top of our head a bar there is two circles with a dot in the middle.
Now if you've played with yours that might be different but if we click on that we get a dropdown that
is the pivot point dropdown and as we can see there you've got a series of options bounding box center
3d cursor individual origins which can be very useful the medium points and the active elements.
So the medium points is the average point of all of these objects.
Which is why let's whiz round to the top so we can see exactly in the grid where B it is there.
Now the bounding box is gonna be slightly more to the left because what the bounding box will do is
it will draw around all of the objects including the mesh data.
So what I'm going to do here is I'm going to press scale again and just mark roughly where it's going
to be.
So we've got four in and two down roughly.
Okay.
Now if we go ahead and change the bounding box center hopefully it will be different enough.
Yes.
There we go.
It's changed significantly.
And the reason why it's changed significantly is because we're drawing a box around all of our objects.
Now the camera and the lamp are infinitely small they're just the origin point but that cube.
Well it's two meters by two meters by two meters which changes where the box would be drawn.
And then we go to the center of that box.
I rarely use that option to be quite honest the main ones the IOUs are either the medium points individual
origins or 3D curse.
So let's deal with the individual origins.
Now this is really useful because it does mean that things will rotate around their own origin.
So if I was around to the side here and press the Aki you'll notice that all of these objects are rotating
around their own origins.
Now the lamp because it's of type A POINT lamp I believe it's called Let's go click on the lamp and
check out its properties and the properties pane.
Yes it's a point lamp.
It doesn't have any direction.
If I were to change that to a spot lamp now it has direction.
Now we can select everything and if we rotate we can see that all rotating individually.
If that was still on median they would rotate in a much different way.
They all rotate around together relative to each other.
Finally the 3D cast and now the 3D cast is a really useful one at the moment 3D curses in the center
of our scene.
And if we press the Aki we can move and rotate around that point.
But what it does enable you to do is select anywhere so we can use the 3D selector tool in the tool
shelf if that's not their press the key to bring it up and then we can go ahead and put the 3d cursor
anywhere we want and then it will rotate around that new position.
If we select another object you've got to remember to go back into the tool shelf and go back to your
selection tools as well to select box.
There we go.
Now rotate around that point.
That's incredibly useful if you're trying to open doors but you need the origin of an object to be in
a specific place.
That doesn't mean it's a pivot point because we can move the origins around and as you've seen when
we're in edit mode.
If I were to move the cube over here and then when we go ahead and rotate.
So if we change our pivot points back out into object mode change our pivot point to medium because
the medium point is just this individual cube here it's going to rotate around there.
So if we wanted it swinging around a central point we can make it do so.
So the final one which I want to discuss here is your individual origins.
This can be really really useful when you're actually modelling.
So if we go into our cube let's select this face and extrude this one out.
So let this face extrude that one out and select this one extrude that's out.
It's a bit arbitrary at the moment but let's select all of those.
Now if we go ahead and just scale is going to be scaling based upon the central point or whatever the
pivot point is now how do we use another shortcut here and bring up what's called a PI menu.
So if we go ahead and press the full stop or period key on your keyboard it'll bring up a menu that's
got those pivot points in it.
So we can change it to the 3d cursor or we can change it to individual origins.
Now it's scaling them individually which is what I intended to do rather than scaling towards the pivot
point we had previously and in this case it wouldn't have been the previous pivot point here.
It would be the medium point between all of these faces which can be a real tough one to find.
It looks like I've got some funky chair leg being designed here.
Okay so there we go.
We've got a very brief introduction to pivot points we're gonna play with them lots as we go through
the course they're going to be incredibly useful whenever you need and articulating objects or as we
just demonstrated here.
If you need to scale multiple objects all at the same time or multiple faces all at the same time but
don't want them scaling in towards the center.
Really really useful.
We need to solidify that knowledge now in the form of a challenge.
Okay so your challenge is to create a doorframe and a door at separate objects and then using pivot
points control the door so that you can open and close it.
And just a reminder how that should be looking.
If you cast your mind back to the beginning of the video you will remember me adjusting a door like
this.
So I've set up a pivot point with the door so I can move it and rotate it around backwards and forwards.
In this case along the y axis and yes this isn't a traditional door this is more of a trapdoor that
I should be making.
So go ahead pause the video now and give that a go.
Hello everybody and welcome back.
OK so I'm going to start off here in a default scene now.
Blenders in spaces ever so slightly different.
We've got a few extra bits here and there.
I'm just in a future version and I've come back.
But the basic premise of everything is still the same.
So let's start off by making this trapdoor.
Let's zoom in to have a look at the Cube.
I'm going to scale it just on the z axis to create the trapdoor itself.
So let's scale it by point 1 and looking at it I think that'll be better if it was scaled a bit smaller
so point nought five nought point nought five.
There we go.
Yeah that's that's about the right thickness.
The first thing I want to do is straightaway name my final trap door because if you're working on a
scene as you start adding things in it could be very very confusing if you haven't done that as you've
gone okay.
So the next thing I'm going to do is create the surround that goes around here.
I'm going to start by using a cube as well.
There's several ways you could do this and you'll probably end up using a different way to me.
I'm going to scale that cube as well down by point nought five.
Now just duplicated the original one as well that would equally work.
I'm going to have a look from the top and I'm going to go to my snapping tool at the top make sure it's
turned on when it is turned on I've got it set to increment at the moment so I can snap and move things
around.
And what that should enable me to do is move things based upon the grid that already exists.
So if I a g not Z sorry a Y and lift this up we can see we can align things really well providing I
now scale this down by an appropriate factor I can still continue to do that.
So if I was to scale this down by maybe point two but just on the x axis sorry the y axis here we go.
We can see that it still matches up with the surroundings.
So then I can like a g y.
I can align it if you happen to have created something that doesn't quite align like that.
You may get the alignment using vertex snapping and then you can snap things to just an individual point.
But because I'm using whole numbers at the moment and they divide through nicely We're absolutely fine.
So that's one of the surrounds.
Don I'm going to go into edit mode so that this is all one object as we produce it and then I can duplicate
this bits of mesh with shift and D.
And because we're looking down from the top I can move it or round very freely and puts it on there
I can then duplicate that again rotate it around by 90 degrees.
We don't have to specify an axis because we're looking through that.
I can then move it to the appropriate location and I can we press s here to scale and we need to lock
it to the y axis but you may notice that it's no longer actually snapping.
Fair enough.
How do we get around that.
Well if we hold down control it will snap to the grid again it will re enable the snapping functionality
and then finally I can duplicate that again and there.
Now this has a series of duplicate vertices over the place but for the moment we won't worry about that.
Now the thing to do is name this.
So it's no longer a cube is it's it's a trap door frame I suppose you'd call it that.
Now that we've got that named we can tab out the next thing we can do is set a pivot point for our door.
So if I select the trap door which I now have selected I can move the 3d cursor to this end point here.
Now there are multiple ways of doing that.
I'm going to open up the property side bungler press the Anki to do that.
I could have also clicked on the little tab go down to view and would just go to the x location of the
3d cursor and we can just drag that out.
So it's going to be one units we've gone negative here and it also needs to be lifted up.
So on the z axis by nought point nought five then it's definitely in the right place.
Then when we change our pivot points to the 3d cursor we can then rotate it let's say around the y axis
and it will open and shut.
Now if you were exporting this or you wanted your pivot point to naturally be in another place you could
change the origin location to there as well.
But in this particular case don't need to do that.
And if you did do something like that it basically means that physics wouldn't be calculated properly
if you were applying that and several other issues may start occurring when you move the origins around.
You really have to think about your use case when it comes to that.
And of course we'll discuss that in more detail later in the course.
There we go.
That's it for this lecture.
We can press our hair we can open it up and down.
I hope you've successfully made and aligned and used pivot points.
It's open and shut your trap door.
Please share your work over in the discussions and I'll see you all in the next lecture.